.TH BGMD 1 "March 2026" "0.1.3" "bgmd Manual"
.SH NAME
bgmd \- Modern Bible Gateway to Markdown tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bgmd
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fICOMMAND\fR [\fIARGS\fR]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bgmd
is a Python-based CLI tool designed to fetch Bible passages from BibleGateway.com and convert them into clean, highly-structured Markdown. It is specifically optimized for use in note-taking applications like Obsidian, featuring YAML front matter and H6 verse markers.
.PP
The tool includes built-in support for the Catholic canon, automatic local caching, and request randomization to ensure stable and conservative interaction with Bible Gateway's servers.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B fetch \fIREFERENCE\fR
Fetch a specific Bible passage. The \fIREFERENCE\fR can be a full chapter (e.g., "John 3") or a verse range (e.g., "John 3:16-21"). You can provide multiple translations as a comma-separated list to the \fB--translation\fR flag to generate a comparison view.
.TP
.B compare \fIREFERENCE\fR
Compare multiple translations side-by-side. Use the \fB--translations\fR flag to specify versions.
.TP
.B lectionary
Fetch the daily lectionary readings for a given date (defaults to today) from the Vanderbilt Revised Common Lectionary.
.TP
.B translations
List commonly used and recommended Bible translation codes supported by the tool.
.TP
.B config-show
Display the current user configuration and the path to the settings file.
.TP
.B config-set \fIKEY\fR \fIVALUE\fR
Update a configuration setting. \fIKEY\fR must be one of: translation, mode, canon, cache_dir, no_randomize, no_jitter.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-t, \-\-translation \fITEXT\fR
Bible version code (e.g., NABRE, RSVCE). For \fBfetch\fR, multiple codes can be comma-separated.
.TP
.B \-l, \-\-layout [table|interleaved]
Layout for comparison view. Defaults to table.
.TP
.B \-m, \-\-mode [obsidian|plain]
Output format. Defaults to obsidian.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-cache
Force a fresh fetch from Bible Gateway, bypassing the local HTML cache.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-randomize
Disable browser impersonation rotation.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-jitter
Disable randomized delays between network requests.
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Enable verbose output and write intermediate debug files.
.TP
.B \-\-help
Show help message and exit.
.SH CONFIGURATION
Settings are stored in \fI~/.config/bgmd/config.json\fR. You can manage these using the \fBconfig-show\fR and \fBconfig-set\fR commands.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.cache/bgmd/
Directory containing cached HTML files from Bible Gateway.
.TP
.I ~/.config/bgmd/config.json
JSON file storing user default settings.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Fetch John chapter 3 using configured defaults:
.B bgmd fetch "John 3"
.TP
Compare John 3:16 in NABRE and RSVCE:
.B bgmd compare "John 3:16" -t "NABRE,RSVCE"
.TP
Fetch a specific verse range in RSVCE:
.B bgmd fetch "Psalm 23:1-3" --translation RSVCE
.TP
Fetch today's lectionary readings:
.B bgmd lectionary
.TP
Set the default translation to NRSVCE:
.B bgmd config-set translation NRSVCE
.SH AUTHOR
Created as a modern successor to bg2md and bg2obs-catholic.
.SH BUGS
Report bugs via the project's issue tracker.
